Update hardware requirements for running Oasis Node (consensus, ParaTimes, Damask, Cobalt) (#95)
oasisprotocol/docs: docs/general/run-a-node/prerequisites/hardware-recommendations.md

# Hardware Requirements

> The Oasis Network is composed of multiple classes of nodes and services, such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Oasis Network is composed of multiple classes of nodes and services such
```

as:

> * Consensus Validator/Non-validator Node

Reviewer: Capitalized Validator, Non-validator, Node terms here https://docs.oasis.dev/general/run-a-node/set-up-your-node/ are just because they are part of the title.

```suggestion
* consensus validator or non-validator node
```

Author: For consistency I used capitalized "Consensus" when it appear in the beginning of all bullet points.

Suggestion: It would have been enough to suggest these changes once and tell to apply it throughout the document.

> * Emerald ParaTime Compute/Client Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald ParaTime compute or client node
```

> * Emerald Web3 Gateway with PostgreSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald Web3 gateway with PostgreSQL
```

> * Cipher ParaTime Compute/Client Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cipher ParaTime compute or client node
```

This page describes the **minimum** and **recommended** system hardware
requirements for running different types of nodes on the Oasis Network.

:::caution

If you configure a system with slower resources than the recommended values, you
run the risk of being underprovisioned, causing proposer node timeouts and
synchronization delays. This could result in losing stake and not participating
in committees.

> If the system will not have enough memory or storage, that will result in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run out of memory or storage, the
```

> Oasis node process being forcefully killed. This could lead to BadgerDB state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oasis node process will be forcefully killed. This could lead to the state
```

> corruption, losing stake and not participating in committees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
corruption of BadgerDB, losing stake and not participating in committees.
```

Author: To not go too much into details here, I decided to remove the mention of "BadgerDB".

:::

> ### CPU <a id="suggested-minimum-configurations"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CPU {#suggested-minimum-configurations}
```

> * Consensus Validator/Non-validator Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Consensus validator or non-validator node:
```

  * Minimum: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with [AES instruction set] support

>   * Recommended: 2.0+ GH+ x86-64 CPU with 2 cores/vCPUs with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with 2 cores/vCPUs with
```

    [AES instruction set] and [AVX2] support
 

> * Emerald ParaTime Compute Node and all ParaTime Client Nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald ParaTime compute node and all ParaTime client nodes:
```

  * Minimum: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with [AES instruction set] support

>   * Recommended: 2.0+ GHz x86-64 CPU with 4+ cores/vCPUs with

Author: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with 4 cores/vCPUs with
```

    [AES instruction set] and [AVX2] support

> * Emerald Web3 Gateway with PostgreSQL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald Web3 gateway with PostgreSQL:
```

  * Minimum: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU

>   * Recommended: 2.0+ GHz x86-64 CPU with 2 cores/vCPUs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with 2 cores/vCPUs
```

> * Cipher ParaTime Compute Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cipher ParaTime compute node:
```

  * Minimum: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with [AES instruction set] and [Intel SGX] support

>   * Recommended: 2.0+ GHz x86-64 CPU with 2+ cores/vCPUs with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 2.0 GHz x86-64 CPU with 2 cores/vCPUs with
```

    [AES instruction set], [Intel SGX] and [AVX2] support

:::info

> During ordinary operation nodes can work with the minimal CPU resources.

Reviewer: I would use *node* in a personal context.

```suggestion
During regular workload your node will operate with the minimal CPU resources.
```

Author: Much better. :+1:

> However, if put under heavy load they might require more cores/vCPUs (e.g. an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if put under heavy load it might require more cores/vCPUs (e.g. an
```

> Emerald ParaTime Client Node behind a public Emerald Web3 Gateway).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Emerald ParaTime client node behind a public Emerald Web3 gateway).
```

The [AES instruction set] support is required by [Deoxys-II-256-128], a
Misuse-Resistant Authenticated Encryption (MRAE) algorithm, which is used for
encrypting ParaTime's state.

The [Advanced Vector Extensions 2 (AVX2)][AVX2] support enables faster Ed25519
signature verification which in turn makes a node sync faster.

> The [Intel SGX] support is required if you want to run Paratime Compute Nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Intel SGX] support is required if you want to run ParaTime compute nodes
```

that use a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE).

:::

[AES instruction set]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AES_instruction_set
[Deoxys-II-256-128]: https://sites.google.com/view/deoxyscipher
[AVX2]:
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#Advanced_Vector_Extensions_2
[Intel SGX]:
  https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/software-guard-extensions.html

### Memory

> * Consensus Validator/Non-validator Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Consensus validator or non-validator node:
```

  * Minimum: 4 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 8 GB of ECC RAM

> * All ParaTime Compute/Client Nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All ParaTime compute or client nodes:
```

  * Minimum: 8 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 16 GB of ECC RAM

* Emerald Web3 Gateway with PostgreSQL:
  * Minimum: 4 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 8 GB of ECC RAM

:::info

> During ordinary operation nodes can work with less than the minimum amount of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During regular workload your node will operate with less than the minimum amount of
```

> memory. However, at certain time points, the node will absolutely require more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory. However, at certain time points, it will absolutely require more
```

memory. Examples of such more resource intensive time points are the initial

> state sync, BadgerDB migration when upgrading a node to Oasis Core 21.2.x,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state sync, BadgerDB migration when upgrading a node to a new major version of the Oasis Core,
```

generating storage checkpoints with BadgerDB, periodic BadgerDB compactions...

:::

### Storage

> * Consensus Validator/Non-validator Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Consensus validator or non-validator node:
```

* Consensus validator or non-validator node:

>   * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Minimum: 400 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

>   * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 700 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

> * Emerald ParaTime Compute/Client Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald ParaTime compute or client node:
```

* Emerald ParaTime compute or client node (in addition to the consensus storage requirements):

>   * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Minimum: 400 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

>   * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 700 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

> * Emerald Web3 Gateway with PostgreSQL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Emerald Web3 gateway with PostgreSQL:
```

>   * Minimum: 300+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Minimum: 300 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

>   * Recommended: 500+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 500 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

> * Cipher ParaTime Compute/Client Node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cipher ParaTime compute or client Node:
```

>   * Minimum: 200+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Minimum: 200 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

>   * Recommended: 300+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Recommended: 300 GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

  * Recommended: 300+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

:::caution

Consensus and ParaTime state is stored in an embedded [BadgerDB] database which
was [designed to run on SSDs][badgerdb-ssds]. Hence, we **strongly discourage**
trying to run a node that stores data **on classical HDDs**.

:::

:::info

> The Consensus layer and ParaTime layers accumulate state over time. The speed at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The consensus layer and ParaTime layers accumulate state over time. The speed at
```

> which the state grows depends on the network's and ParaTimes' usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which the state grows depends on the number of network and ParaTime transactions.
```

Author: I described it in an even longer way: "depends on the number of transactions on the network and ParaTimes."

> For example, a Consensus Non-validator Node on the Mainnet accumulated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a consensus non-validator node on the Mainnet accumulated:
```

> * 280 GB of Consensus state in ~1 year between Apr 28, 2021 and Apr 11, 2022 (since the [Cobalt upgrade])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 280 GB of consensus state in ~1 year between Apr 28, 2021 and Apr 11, 2022 (since the [Cobalt upgrade])
```

> * 32 GB of Consensus state in ~1 month since the [Damask upgrade]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 32 GB of consensus state in ~1 month since the [Damask upgrade]
```

> For example, an Emerald Client Node on the Mainnet additionally accumulated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, an Emerald client node on the Mainnet additionally accumulated:
```

* 260 GB of Emerald ParaTime state in ~5 months between Nov 18, 2021 and Apr 11, 2022 (since the [Emerald Mainnet launch])
* 25 GB of Emerald ParaTime state in ~1 month since the [Damask upgrade]

> For example, an Emerald Web3 Gateway with PostgreSQL accumulated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, an Emerald Web3 gateway with PostgreSQL encountered:
```

* 210 GB of database growth in ~5 months between Nov 18, 2021 and Apr 11, 2022 (since the [Emerald Mainnet launch])

:::

:::info

> Node doesn't need to keep the state from _before_ the latest dump & restore

Reviewer: I would rewrite this block into a tip like this:

```
:::tip

Dump & restore upgrades (e.g. [Damask upgrade], [Cobalt upgrade]) include state
wipes which will free the node storage. Historical state can be accessed by running
a separate archive node.

:::
```

Author: Much better. :+1:

upgrade (e.g. before the [Cobalt upgrade]). Historical state can be archived
separately.

:::

:::info

> It is also possible to configure the node to _not_ keep all the state from the

Reviewer: Try to avoid passive speech and gerunds.

```suggestion
You can configure your node _not to_ keep a complete state from the
```

> genesis onward, reducing the amount of storage needed to keep the Consensus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
genesis onward which will reduce the amount of storage required for the consensus
```

> layer's and ParaTime layers' state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ParaTime state.
```

> To enable prunning of the Consensus state set the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable pruning of the consensus state set the
```

`consensus.tendermint.abci.prune.strategy` and
`consensus.tendermint.abci.prune.num_kept` parameters appropriately in your
[node's configuration].

> To enable prunning for the ParaTime state set the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable pruning of the ParaTime state set the
```

`runtime.history.pruner.strategy` and `runtime.history.pruner.num_kept`
parameters appropriately in your [node's configuration].

:::

[BadgerDB]: https://dgraph.io/docs/badger/
[badgerdb-ssds]: https://dgraph.io/docs/badger/design/
[Cobalt upgrade]: ../../mainnet/previous-upgrades/cobalt-upgrade.md
[Damask upgrade]: ../../mainnet/damask-upgrade
[Emerald Mainnet launch]:
  https://medium.com/oasis-protocol-project/oasis-emerald-evm-paratime-is-live-on-mainnet-13afe953a4c9
[node's configuration]: ../set-up-your-node/run-validator.md#configuring-the-oasis-node

### Network

* Consensus validator node and Emerald ParaTime compute node:

>   * Minimum: 200+ Mbps internet connection with low latency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Minimum: 200 Mbps internet connection with low latency
```

  * Recommended: 1 Gbps internet connection with low latency

:::info

> During ordinary operation nodes receive much less network traffic. However, at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During regular workload your node will receive much less network traffic. However, at
```

> certain time points, when huge bursts of transactions arrive proposer nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
certain time points when huge bursts of transactions arrive, you need to assure that
```

> should not timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it doesn't timeout.
```

[AVX2]:
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#Advanced_Vector_Extensions_2
[Intel SGX]:
  https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/software-guard-extensions.html

### Memory

* Consensus validator or non-validator node:
  * Minimum: 4 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 8 GB of ECC RAM

* All ParaTime compute or client nodes:
  * Minimum: 8 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 16 GB of ECC RAM

* Emerald Web3 gateway with PostgreSQL:
  * Minimum: 4 GB of ECC RAM
  * Recommended: 8 GB of ECC RAM

:::info

During regular workload your node will operate with less than the minimum amount
of memory. However, at certain time points, it will absolutely require more
memory. Examples of such more resource intensive time points are the initial
state sync, BadgerDB migration when upgrading a node to a new major version of
the Oasis Core, generating storage checkpoints with BadgerDB, periodic BadgerDB
compactions...

:::

### Storage

* Consensus validator or non-validator node:
  * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
  * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

* Emerald ParaTime compute or client node:

>   * Add these to the Consensus Layer storage requirements
>   * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
>   * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage

Author: @matevz Which suggestion sounds better?

```suggestion
  * In addition to the storage requirements for consensus state, the Emerald ParaTime requires additional storage
  * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
  * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

```suggestion
  * In addition to the storage requirements for consensus state, it requires at least additional: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
  * In addition to the storage requirements for consensus state, we recommend additional: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

Reviewer: Maybe replace the initial bullet with

```suggestion
* Emerald ParaTime compute or client node (in addition to the consensus storage requirements):
  * Minimum: 400+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
  * Recommended: 700+ GB of SSD or NVMe fast storage
```

And the same for Cipher below.

~Maybe move the Cipher next to Emerald so all ParaTimes are grouped together?~ nvm, I see that this order is consistent throughout the document, so this is fine.

Author: Suggestions applied and merged with master. Waiting for approval...
